# CS540 W21 DBMS 
## Relational Algebra & Datalog (Continued)
#### Equivalency 
#### Unsafe Relational Algebra & Datalog 
- each element in a relational algebra / datalog should be referenced at least once to be safe. 
#### SQL 
- WHERE Clause & LIKE Operator: 
```sql
WHERE dname like 'T%' -- this will return dname starting with T
```
The above line will filter the corresponding column with regular expressions. However, this operation is quite slow. 

#### Null Values 
'Null' is not like any other value; Potentially the admin didn't enter the data or know the value. 

Null is used to represent the lack of information of the corresponding attribute. 

To pull the data with NULL value, you have to specify it as 
```sql
SELECT * 
FROM Sells
WHERE price IS NULL
```

In most cases, NULL causes problems with databases. In other words, NULL is considered a bug. 

### Multi-relation Query: JOIN 
##### Question: find the coffee brands liked by at least one person who frequents 'Culture'
Given relations Likes(dname, cname), Frequents(dname, sname), juxtaposing both relations in FROM iff Frequent.dname = Likes.dname. 
```sql
SELECT cname
FROM Likes, Frequents
WHERE Frequents.sname = 'Culture' AND Frequents.dname = Likes.dname; -- This is EquiJoin as well as natural join since the condition is met on all common field, which is dname.
```
#### Various types of JOIN 
- Equijoin: when the condition is equality. 
- Natural join: EquiJoin on all common fields.
- Inner join: only returns the matching ones. 
- Outer join: 
a. Left(right) outer join keeps all tuples from the left(right) relation. Unmatching ones will be filled with null.  

#### Subqueries / Nested Queries
For specifying a conditon in WHERE or FROM clauses, we can use a subquery.

Given Sells(sname, cname, price), find the coffee shops that service Costa for the same price Culture charges for Kenya.
```sql
SELECT sname
FROM Sells
WHERE cname = 'Cost' AND price = (SELECT price FROM Sells WHERE sname = 'Culture' AND cname = 'Kenya');
```
First, we need to find the price Culture charges for Kenya beans. (subquery)
Then, pull the data with the matching price from the first step. 

#### Helpers for Subqueries -- ALL, ANY, IN
##### ALL & ANY
In many cases, the result of your subqueries is a set. Thus, we can use ALL or ANY drawing from the set. 

Given Sells(sname, cname, price), find the coffee shops that serve 'Kenya' for a cheaper price than the price that all coffee shops charge for 'Costa'.

Let's break it down! 
1. First, the subquery is to find out the *set of all prices for 'Costa'* and name it 'CostaPrice'
2. Then, use the set drawn from 1 and compare the price drawn with all values. 

```
First part (subquery): SELECT price FROM Sells WHERE cname = 'Costa'

Main part (main query): SELECT sname FROM Sells WHERE cname = 'Kenya' AND price < ALL (subquery)

Here, ALL is necessary. 
```
* What if we use ANY instead of ALL? 
It returns the coffee shops that serve 'Kenya' for a cheaper price than the price that at least one coffee shop charges for Costa. 

##### IN 
IN is used for checking the membership. 

Given Coffee(cname, producer) and Likes(dname, cname), find the producers of the coffee brands John likes. 

Let's break it down!
1. First, find the cname 'John' likes.
2. Then, find the producer of the coffee brand that falls into the set 1. 

```
First part (subquery): SELECT cname FROM Likes WHERE dname = 'John'

Main part (main query): SELECT producer FROM Coffee WHERE cname IN (subquery)
```
##### EXISTS or NOT EXISTS
Check whether the result of the subquery is empty or not.

Given Coffee(cname, producer), find the coffee brands that are the only brandmade by their producers. 

Let's break it down!
1. First, when we have ONLY, it's easier to answer the negation and get the negation of the negation. Find producers that produce more than a single brand of coffee. 
2. Then, negate 1 from the whole set. 

```sql
First part (subquery): SELECT * FROM Coffee WHERE producer = b1.producer AND cname <> c1.cname

Main part (main query): SELECT cname FROM Coffee c1 WHERE NOT EXISTS (subquery);
```

##### DISTINCT 
Bags (Duplicates OK) vs. Set (No Duplicates)
e.g., {a, a, b, b, b} is okay!

Generally, the result of SQL queries are bags with duplicate values. 

If you'd like to remove the duplicate values, use DISTINCT. 

#### Set Operations with the Same Schema for Compatibility
1. R UNION S
2. R INTERSECT S -- AND 
```
(SELECT * FROM Likes) -- the coffee drinkers likes the brand 
INTERSECT 
(SELECT dname, cname FROM Frequents, Sells WHERE Frequents.sname = Sells.sname) -- the drinker frequenst at the coffeeshop that serves the brand
```
The schema of both queries should be compatible. Both queries have the schema of dname, cname

3. R EXCEPT S

* Caveats: since the set operations remove duplicate values (because they involves set), if you'd like dupliaces, use ALL. 

#### Aggregation Functions 
Aggregate functions map a set of value into *a single value*. Generally, Aggregate functions do not consider NULL values. 
1. COUNT
2. SUM
3. AVG
4. MIN
5. MAX
```
SELECT COUNT(price) -- does not consider entries with price = NULL, so if you'd like to COUNT the number of entry, use COUNT(*) or COUNT(cname) -- with the primary key
FROM Sells
WHERE sname = 'Culture'
```

#### Aggregate Functions Over Groups 
```
SELECT cname, MIN(price) AS minprice
FROM Sells
GROUP BY cname;
```
GROUP BY usually comes last, which categorizes the price by the specified column. 

#### Aggregation Function CANNOT be used in WHERE clause
Never put Aggregation functions in WHERE
- Instead, you can used HAVING, which is similiar to WHERE but can be used with aggregate functions
- HAVING comes after GROUP BY
##### Caveats: only the attributes used in GROUP BY can be used in HAVING 
```sql
SELECT cname, Min(price)
FROM Sells
GROUP BY cname 
HAVING (MAX(price)<11) OR (cname='Kenya')
```
--> In this case, the attributes used in GROUP BY include HAVING clause attribute, so it's acceptable. 
On the other hand, when we use an attribute not mentioned in GROUP BY, it will cause an error. 
```sql
SELECT cname, Min(price)
FROM Sells
GROUP BY cname 
HAVING (MAX(price)<11) OR (sname='Red Lion')
```
--> This is not acceptable, since there can be numerous sname for each cname group.


___________________________________________________________
### SQL PRACTICE (1/14/2021)
Given two tables, Out(game, outcome) and Bets(who, outcome, game, amt),

1. List the completed games that nobody bet on. 

```sql
SELECT Game 
FROM Out
WHERE Game NOT IN (SELECT Game FROM Bets)
```

2. Who bet the most money on a single game? 
```sql
SELECT who, amt 
FROM Bets
WHERE amt >= ALL(SELECT amt FROM Bets)
```
--> Compare the selected amount with others' amt using a subquery 

3. List the games that all bettors agree on.
```sql
(SELECT game FROM Bets) 
WHERE game 
NOT IN (SELECT B1.game FROM Bets B1, Bets B2 WHERE (B1.game = B2.game) AND (B1.outcome <> B2.outcome))
```
--> Out of every game, eliminate the games that people don't agree on

#### Negation of Negation: negate the original stuff you're looking for, and then negate the result.
It's easier to compute the negation of what you're looking for, and then negate it. 

4. The number of people betting on OSU to win and the number betting on OSU to lose. 
```sql
SELECT game, outcome, Count(who)
FROM Bets 
GROUP BY game, outcome
```
--> If you look at the result, you can see aggregate functions applied to game and outcome. 
--> (game, outcome) case for each
--> WHen there's 'for each game' statement, group the attribute!

5. Find the people who have made two or more bets on OSU to lose. 
--> This suggests the use of aggregate functions. We would like to group by 'people'
```sql
SELECT who
FROM Bets 
WHERE outcome = 'L' 
GROUP BY who 
HAVING COUNT(outcome) >= 2;
```
##### General rule of thumb: try to minimize the number of attributes used in GROUP BY 

6. Who bet the most money overall? 
--> This signals the grouping by person
--> The sum of money should be calculuated/compared per person
```sql
SELECT who, Sum(amt) 
FROM Bets 
GROUP BY who
HAVING SUM(amt) >= ALL (SELECT SUM(amt) FROM Bets GROUP BY who)
```
7. Who has bet on every game? 
```sql
create view AllGames as 
(select game from Out) union (select game from Bets)

select who from Bets group by who 
having count (distinct game) = (select count(distinct game) from AllGames)
```
When you're counting all games, then you need to get a **union** of Out and Bets. Also, since group by was used, **having** is used instead of where clause.  

##### Create view: a simple way to write a modular subquery -- mainly as a temporary storage

```sql
create view AllGames as 
(select game from Out) union (select game from Bets)
```
Here, the view is used to store all games that took place. 

```sql
select who from Bets group by who 
having count (distinct game) = (select count(distinct game) from AllGames)
```
Given the view, we can select the person whose bet was on every single game shown in the view we created to keep track of every single game. 

8. What games have won the most money for the people who bet on OSU to win? 

First, we need to compute the amount of money each game has made by joining Bets and Out. 
Then, we can add some conditions in the where clause so filter out the games. 
By using the result from the previous steps, we can pull out SumAmt that is larger than any other entries.

```sql
create view Success-Win as 
(select bets.game, sum(Bets.amt) as SumAmt from Bets, Out 
where out.game = Bets.game and 
Bets.outcome = 'W' and 
Out.outcome = 'W' 
group by Game)

select distinct game 
from Success-Win 
where SumAmt >= All (select SumAMt from Success-Win)
```

9. List the people who won some money so far. 

First, compute the amount of money gained or lost respectively. You can accomplish this by creating two separate views: Success and Failure. 
```sql 
create view Success as 
(select who, sum(amt) as pAmt from Bets, Out where Out.game = Bets.game and Bets.outcome = Out.outcome group by who) 

create view Failure as 
(select who, sum(amt) as nAmt from Bets, Out where Out.game = Bets.game and Bets.outcome <> Out.outcome group by who)
```
As you can see above, the only difference between two is the condition in the where clause. 

Finally, we can calculate who had net gain (winning > losing). 
```sql
(select Success.who from Success, Failure where Success.who = Failure.who and Success.pAmt > Failure.nAmt)
union 
(select who from Success where who not in (select who from failure)) 
```
The second half of the above is to consider people who never failed. As such, we need to consider the edge case to ensure that a query covers every possible scenario. 
